hey what's up i'm making this video to
address the situation that is very
serious today in reference to a
particular controversy but I like to
make my videos in a way that will still
be meaningful and we're talking about
five years from now 10 years from now
someone watch this video who has no
comprehension of the particular
controversy that surrounded me at the
time I recorded the video I also make my
videos and awareness that my own
daughter may see them one day maybe 10
years from now maybe more and all of my
videos although they address a topic
they also do tell you about me that's
partly just because that's what I want
to watch on youtube myself that's partly
because I like to keep it real I think
keeping it real is most of the valley of
what you get out of youtube because
otherwise you can be watching up you
watching a world-class move you can
watch your movie with a multi-million
dollar budget this is something
different I'm not trying to compete with
that and also because ultimately this is
my channel this is about me this is
about my life it's not just about
veganism it's not just about any one
thing and I hope that also disarms
people and helps to relax people because
one of the questions that you get asked
if you try to treat things in a more
impersonal way if you try to ask more
act more like a news broadcaster like
you're someone objective who's not
involved personally you get asked who do
you think you are and I think in almost
all my videos because I include myself
in the story I make references to my own
experience my own bias mount perspective
you get a fair enough sense of who I
think I am of what motivates me and why
I'm saying these things matter at hand
today and I mean today there are
accusations against a guy within the
vegan community which is not a community
there are accusations that a guy is some
kind of sexual predator some kind of
alleged rapist and as is often the case
with rumors that start in the internet a
lot of anonymous and vague claims emails
from uncertain sources
and this is already resulted in threats
of violence against the guy I don't know
the guy I've I've never spoken him I've
no contact with him I've never even seen
a YouTube video for him to me he's a
complete unknown but people are
threatening to beat him up people are
encouraging other people to confront him
and beat him up so sort of had judge
jury and executioner unfold very rapidly
and now in the past on this channel in
reference to a very different sex
scandal very different set of
allegations that included allegations of
rape against a guy named Joe best a
vegan in Chiang Mai in that context I
talked a lot about tolerance and
tolerance being an underrated virtue and
you know saying things like look you may
not like Joe best you may not like the
way he lives his life but you know it's
actually meaningful and important to
tolerate him even if you're going to
recognize and address what he's done
wrong because he did do some things
wrong I think at the end of that scandal
nobody was seriously accusing him of
rape anymore but he had behaved in a way
that was dishonorable he had brought a
lot of sort of hatred on himself and
there was a lot simply put there was a
lot to apologize for at the end of that
scandal even though nobody was talking
about going the police and making rape
accusations and nobody was threatened to
beat him up nobody was was threatening
violence against the guy um so tolerance
is one thing and the principle of
innocent until proven guilty is another
really what we're talking about here is
the principle of skepticism the word
skepticism is so misused in the 21st
century in 2016 that I now don't use it
at all uh I'll just pause to note really
briefly that that's been saddening for
me person I've read the ancient skeptic
philosophy guys like sex does empiric us
you know ancient Greek and Roman sources
on what skepticism was I know the
meaning and importance of skepticism in
terms of the the history of the Western
world
I would love it if I lived in a place
where I could use the word skepticism in
a meaningful sense and I can't because
it's just one of those words that's been
kind of dragged through the mud and
doesn't mean what it's supposed to mean
anymore um but skepticism in a deep
sense has to apply to these cases it has
to be something you really live your
life by somebody on the internet said
that somebody else is a rapist what do
you do with that information where do
you go from there a lot of people grow
up reading comic books like Batman and
Superman and whatever none of those guys
really spend a lot of time worrying
about the burden of proof worrying about
innocent till proven guilty you know
most the time spider-man he already
knows who the bad guy has because the
bad guy is wearing a costume then
identifies him as a bad guy spider-man
is not concerned about whether or not
dr. octopus is guilty or innocent you
know and that type of fiction um you
know it's not true of all but I would
say it's even true of most kind of
murder mysteries so much in our culture
begins with the presumption of guilt and
then the conflict unfolds and there may
be questions of justice or righteousness
violence and non-violence but they all
take place after that presumption of
guilt I remember I spoke to a lawyer a
young lawyer a young female lawyer who
was interested in being my girlfriend as
it happens probably why she had that
conversation um a lawyer who was
involved in the human rights trials in
Cambodia so some of the leaders people
who had committed atrocities during the
period of communism in Cambodia called
the Khmer Rouge period were on trial
that time and she was you know she was a
minor part of those those legal
proceedings and I remember with very
honest conversation she was pointing out
the differences between those trials and
kind of European Standard
and she pointed that every single one of
them began with the presumption of guilt
Co procedurally what they were doing
started with so you know you were guilty
of massacres and torture and killing
people uh now what do we do about it
haha and now you know that may that may
seem very reasonable in some ways
especially in Cambodia especially with
you know mass murder crimes against
humanity but even in that extreme
situation it's worth thinking about how
to skepticism apply how does the
presumption of innocence apply
procedurally what do we do in these
situations and what is the meaning of
moral responsibility if you take away
the presumption of innocence again I've
studied a lot of political history
things to generate into a witch hunt
fast things to generate into murder and
mass murder a lot more quickly than you
want to think they do generally I mean
in the history of communism you often
start off with small groups of people
who started out as you know labor
organizers trying to get higher wages
talking about helping the poor talking
about human equality and various sort of
pious and positive aspects of communist
ideology and overnight they're they're
kicking down the doors of their
neighbors hunting people down and
murdering them for being bourgeois for
being class enemies um I wish that was
an exaggeration I've studied some some
really dark chapters of the world's
history that really reflect on aspects
of human nature that you do not see in
the movies that Batman did not teach you
about and you know on the other hand as
I say our Western culture today tends to
take for granted some of these virtues
like tolerance skepticism presuming in a
sense until guilty I was just thinking
about this you don't want my way home
from class at university today and I by
the way I'm really busy right now I've
got three stacks of books you don't see
one of the stacks of book here i'm going
to write three essays in three days
basically then i've got final exams and
I've got some other real
challenges on the under near horizon but
on my way home from universe today I was
thinking about this and I was thinking
about different anecdotes my own life I
could tell in relation to this thing of
this guy being accused of some kind of
sexual transgression and now people
threatening to beat him up you know
based on basically internet rumors and
you know that the realest story I can
tell and this is a story I would want my
daughter to hear one day I don't know I
don't know when she would be old enough
to hear it because this is this is
definitely you know rated R but I can
remember I was in a situation where a
young woman told me her story of how she
was a victim of rape repeated rape uh
she was a victim of rape and beating and
in her case she had gone to the police
she had gone to the authorities so again
this is often with these rumors on the
internet one of the questions as well if
your story is true we assume it's true
why didn't you pursue some kind of legal
action so in this young woman's case she
had but the man who had committed these
crimes against her allegedly um you know
the rapist he was in a position of real
power politically and he was able to
suffocate the legal proceedings against
him and over years not right at that
time but I learned a fair bit about that
and again in a real sense one of the
reasons i'm using this in a real sense
till this day i don't know to what
extent he was guilty or innocent it's
possible that he was innocent and he
still used these politically corrupt
measures to defend himself it doesn't
prove he's guilty you know you can be
innocent and still be a corrupt
political figure you know you're guilty
of other things but the the rape charges
could be false or could be exaggerated
could be a mix of the false the true but
hey I was in a situation that really
affected me in a big way
where this young woman talked to me for
several hours about what had happened to
her and I don't know if I learned right
away but I learned piece by piece about
her legal troubles and whole context
surrounding the sort of question of
crime and punishment and when I heard it
all and I put the pieces together I I
really wondered to myself if I should
kill this guy um not out of any kind of
rage I'm not a violent character or
whatever but I mean this was so terrible
and so you know morally upsetting and
she had gone to the courts seeking you
know redress and that had been
completely denied to her and I knew that
I was a person in a position she had
told me but I wasn't connected the case
in any way so it wasn't likely to be a
suspect and again I I grew up reading
Batman and that kind of thing everyone
else and I was really thinking through
you know you don't mention it to anybody
you don't tell her you definitely you
know don't tell the victim but maybe
this is a situation where i should step
in and quietly end this so again some
people might do that lightly or think
about that lately but that was a real
moral burden for me that was a real
question of what is the right thing to
do in these exact circumstances and at
that time I did not take it seriously no
one had ever talked to me about it I did
not think about the concept of innocent
until proven guilty in the way I've just
been describing it's just it's just not
something I really took seriously and in
this case you know either this guy had
subverted the normal course of the law
the normal procedures of innocent till
proven guilty so sort of the last thing
on my mind but as I talked to that young
woman more and especially when I talked
to her in a casual circumstance like
bumped into her at a social event
it became clear to me and this is not
blaming the victim at all and again I'm
presuming she is a victim presuming her
story to be true it became clear to me
just how unreliable she was as a witness
it became clear to me that even though I
wanted to trust her in many ways she was
not trustworthy and I could not trust
her she would contradict things she said
she would have very strange gaps in her
memory like something she told me two
weeks before and so on um she was and
again this may have been part of why she
she was a victim novel envision ball she
oh she obviously was a person who had
cycle psychological problems now again
there's cause and effect there there's
the the so-called chicken and egg
problem that's a misuse term but um
obviously you can ask what was she
psychologically disturbed because she
was a victim or was she someone who had
these psychological problems and was
victim was sort of more targeted and
more susceptible to be a victim for that
reason and you know I mean it's probably
both because I over the years I got to
know her I later later in life she and I
got to know each other very well again
and you know probably she would have had
a lot of her psychological problems
anyway but this experience made them
worse uh but I had to recognize that
almost nothing she was telling me was
reliable and I had no independent source
information to verify anything and she
was someone who lied to me about quite a
few things pathologically you know what
I say I'm going to be really real on
this okay let's let's be a hundred
percent honest I also had an experience
with her uh where we were alone she was
a very good-looking woman extremely
attractive and she did play sports so
she was quite strong I had an experience
there where she assaulted me she
attempted to rape me
and at the time i mean the the only
reason she did not have sex with me was
that I physically you know restrain
tried to hold her to wrists and say you
know what are you doing stop this etc
and she didn't stop she tried again and
at the time I mean I was really aware
many people who have been victims
whether they're victims of childhood
assault or rape would have you a lot of
them will act out some of the same
behaviors later in another context for
various reasons now but anyone who's
done kind of psychology 101 um like I
wasn't mad at her for this this incident
where she she assaulted me I mean really
I would just say I mean she was pretty
strong and she was like literally like
wrestling me down to the ground and
trying to have sex with me and you know
kissing my neck while she was doing it
it was you know that extreme um but it I
didn't feel angry about it but it really
showed me this is someone you know to
what extent could I trust anything she
tells me without some kind of outside
verification and years later I mean I
remember by coincidence I had a really
short conversation with her mother a few
little things attended to confirm me I
think in broad outline a lot of what she
was saying was true she probably was
lying about particular details and maybe
maybe not lying intentionally I mean she
was someone who maybe her grip on
reality wasn't that strong but I did I
did hear some things that I think you
know confirmed parts of her story but
but she also lied to me about about many
things and I told her years later we
didn't talk for like five years not
worth explaining why and I bumped into
her and we had many long conversations
than after a gap Sun fighters and once
we kind of warm to the friendship began
I said to her you know when I first knew
you five years ago this had a really big
impact on me
because I really wondered if I should
intervene and if I should if I should
murder this guy because you'd already
exhausted you know the legal options
open to you and this was such an
injustice and you know etc and she was
shocked at that and she explained to me
that she was very glad I didn't that I
hadn't and she said that she had to
think about it herself whether or not
she should murder the guy because in
Canada at that time and I don't know if
the laws have changed we had a legal
precedent that basically any woman who
was a victim if she had exhausted legal
methods if she had gone to the police
and tried to get the authorities
intervene and if the authorities failed
to help her out then that woman
basically could get away with murder
very interesting I don't know how many
countries in the world have a law or a
principle like that on the books
candidates is probably one of the very
very few and it's also interesting
anyway III assume it's a matter of time
before the Canadian government changes
that law or you know somehow revises
sanders practices for that and they may
they may have done so already cuz i've
been living outside of canada for so
many years i may not i may not be up to
date on that but anyway she had actually
really thought that through and thought
through the implications of it and she
had decided that even though she was the
victim of this terrible thing it was the
wrong thing to do and that you know
among other things she really thought
about what happened her and she did not
think the death penalty was an
appropriate punishment anyway and she
she had really thought it through and it
was very very interesting for me to hear
that that perspective but the big lesson
that I had to take home from that for
the rest of my life in a non-trivial way
in a profound sense was how skepticism
applies to these things these human
personal reaction skepticism is not just
about the progress of science skepticism
is not just about you know gravity and
whether the Sun orbits the earth of this
sort of thing skepticism impacts you
know personal emotionally moving
difficult to deal with situations of
this kind and that's when it's hardest
to be a skeptic in a meaningful sense
that's when it's most of a challenge
when it requires the most self
discipline now look this video shouldn't
go on for too long but I mean on another
level I have also seen I have seen
rumors and malicious lies and
accusations spread on the Internet in
all kinds of circumstances I remember
there was one young woman who I talked
to she was vegan there was no reason I
knew her and she intentionally lied that
I had been the basically hitting on her
that I had been trying to start a
relationship with her start a love
affair with her she intentionally lied
on the internet about that and at the
time I was married I wasn't looking for
any college I was married and I was
raising a newborn baby and I remember
with that young woman like the very
first message I sent to her said oh you
know I'm married and my wife is an
expert in the same area that you're
studying University you should let me
put you in touch with her so like right
off
bad the nature of that email
relationship was that I was you know
presenting myself as someone who was
interested in her academic work who was
also vegan and where you know I
mentioned I was married there was
absolutely zero um sexual component to
it I remember when that girl made the
accusations my my wife really laughed
out loud because uh she that this young
woman is not my type my my ex-wife knows
what kind of women I'm attracted to and
whatever dress them we know each other
really well um we're still in the legal
process getting divorced as the story
but she just laughed out loud at that it
was there it was laughable just those
circumstances but she also remember
because I told I said oh you know
there's this younger woman and she's
studying something you know similar
related to your expertise and university
and you know so that was situation where
I my involvement was nothing but
goodwill but goodwill and boredom it was
the other reality at that time you know
you don't sleep much when you're taking
care of a newborn baby and you have you
also have sort of funny periods of free
time you know you just put the baby to
bed and you're burnt out you're sitting
anything so you know I did I spent time
you know writing email and I had had a
blog back then so you sort of have this
combination being exhausted and and
you're busy but then you have free time
so as you know partly goodwill partly
boredom that I ever talk to that person
but wow I mean she denounced me in a
malicious intentional attack to
intentional attempt to blacken my
character and make it seem in vague
terms that I was a creep or what have
you so obviously that's you know and
look I mean none of this stuff hurts my
feelings nopee if people call me fat on
the internet it doesn't hurt my feelings
but I would say this that's a case where
someone was lying intentionally so in
some ways it's the simplest sort of case
anyone watching this video if you ask
yourself what if your ex girlfriend or
ex boyfriend put a testimonial here on
YouTube put a video on the internet
in which they did not lie in which every
single thing they said was true but just
stated out of context and in the most
unflattering way possible anyone can be
made to sound like a criminal okay
without even lying and I don't care even
if you're 16 years old or something you
know if you have a situation where like
you'd be anything would be that you know
I remember this have no friend of mine
where you know a guy was weeping and
knocking on her shoes crying in the
hallway and knocking on her door to get
into her apartment well how do you
describe that how do you present that
you can make it sound like he was trying
to break into your house you can make it
sound like you know and and if you if
you call the cops what are you going to
tell the cops and you know uh the human
heart encompasses so many strange
situations but I mean if your honest
self if you stop and just think about
your own ex girlfriends or ex-boyfriends
there are situations you've been in
where you had nothing but good
intentions and where maybe even there
was no conflict but where if that person
came on the internet today without even
lying just stating things out of context
in an unflattering way they can make you
sound like a criminal they can make you
sound like a sex criminal they can make
you sound like a threat to the public
and that is why in every country and in
every culture we need a robust system of
checks and balances we need to have the
principle of being innocent until proven
guilty not just in a court of law not
just in Parliament but in our own heads
and our own hearts when we deal with
people face to face in this world if
you're going to live in Thailand you're
going to be surrounded by a lot of
people who are there as sex tourists
if you're going to live anywhere in
Southeast Asia you're gonna meet and
talk to people who are literally war
criminals people who have blood on their
hands whether it's from the border
between Thailand and Cambodia or the
border between Thailand and Myanmar
don't kid yourselves a lot of you guys
have your heads buried in the sand
you'll meet people who have a background
as stone cold killers okay of all ethnic
groups of all races if you have your
eyes open your ears open its life goes
on you'll meet people who have committed
shall we say war crimes are the most
brutal to kind and one of the most
surprising things for you to learn as
you develop the maturity and detachment
and his life goes on is that many of
those people after the war is over go on
to become completely normal productive
members of society and that in its way
can be more haunting and more disturbing
than any of the silly mythology we grow
up with and we choose to believe in that
we learn in an unexamined away from
religion literature comic books Batman
etc